---
layout: module
number: 1.4
title: Chemical hazards
module: commercial-manned-guarding-including-shop-supervisors
---
The risk of being exposed to hazardous products is not a risk that is inherent
in the profession; yet, it may exist in some working environments as a result
of the activities engaged in by the client company.

There is a whole series of chemical products that can constitute a health
risk. Depending on their properties, the way in which they enter the body
(through inhallation, ingestion, skin and eye contac, or contact with an open
wound) and the quantity absorbed, they may adversely affect the health to a
lesser or greater extent.

The intervening factors are: Toxic, very toxic or harmful products; products
causing irritation; corrosive products, poor storage conditions of the
products, badly aired spaces; an officer not informed of the risks, safety
precautions and preventive measures to be taken.

The effects of chemical products on human health to a great extend depends on
their properties:

\- "toxic", "very toxic" or "noxious" products may change the whole of the
organism or only some organs: lungs, liver, heart, nerves, etc. They may also
cause serious damage to the organism and even death. Some of these products
are defined as being carcinogenic, others as being mutagenic since they may
bring about genetic mutations which may, in turn, cause tumours or fertility
problems.

\- "irritating" products may cause an inflammatory reaction after coming into
contact with the skin, mucous, the eyes, etc. This results in itching, red
blotches, conjunctivitis or inflammations of the respiratory tract.

\- "corrosive" products may have a destructive effect on living tissues (skin,
etc.). They burn the skin and mucus and result in sometimes very serious
wounds that leave scars.


